so this is a uh talk all about the
nearest start of the sun
alpha centauri and
let's uh get the ball rolling
the first thing to notice is you can't
see it from cambridge or anywhere in the
northern hemisphere because it's really
quite a long way
into the southern sky it's in the
constellation of centaurus
which is one of the largest uh
constellations i think
ursa major in the northern hemisphere is
the largest but this is centurus here
and you can see we have the southern
cross
here and the south pole of the sky is
just off the bottom of the screen
but the star in question is this one
here marked with
the handy purple arrow
and it's alpha centauri because it's the
brightest
star in that constellation of centuris
it was spotted that it was a binary star
in fact
a long time ago in 1689 so not
long after the invention of the
telescope um
i think that was 1610 wasn't it with
galileo
so telescopes had moved on a little bit
since then but nevertheless
it was recognized that when you looked
at it with a telescope you could see
what appeared to be a single star as two
and i love this photograph this was one
that somebody took in broad
daylight which is why the sky is blue
so you can see alpha centauri and its uh
companion in uh broad daylight
amazing so here's again
this is the star we're talking about
this one here looking yellow
there's the southern cross and
what first drew people's attention to it
was that they were
mapping the sky and looking to measure
what's called the proper motion of stars
that is the movement against the distant
background of apparently stationary
stars that are
very very long way away so in fact
an astronomer called henderson was on
the island of saint helena
down in the south atlantic of measuring
the proper motion of
stars in the southern sky for the first
time
i must have had fantastic uh seeing
conditions down there
with no light whatsoever because saint
helena
really is a very remote place i think
it's where
napoleon was eventually sent on exile
wasn't it
and what shocked him was he measured the
proper motion of uh alpha centauri and
it was moving across the sky
quite fast now that either means it is
moving very fast or it's quite nearby
so he measured the parallax the amount
that
the position appears to change due to
the motion of the earth
around the sun effectively you can use
the earth's orbit
diameter of 300 million kilometers
as a baseline and get a very very long
thin triangle
out to the star and measure the angle
at the tip of that thin triangle and
from that you can work out the distance
and he did that and was so surprised
that he took several years before he
published the result
in fact it was 1839 before he published
the distance saying it's four
light years he couldn't believe that
he'd found a star that was that close
all the others that had been measured up
to that point were much further away
and as it says on the slide we now
confirm that that's
very good uh measurement modern figure
4.37
making it the closest star to the sun
which is why
everybody's always heard about it
but as we said it's a binary star system
a and b
are the two components they orbit around
their common center of mass
and this diagram is a little bit
complicated but trying to show that
and it's showing it from the perspective
of alpha centauri
a the larger of the two being held still
and the position of b is then marked
here so it's
orbiting down this way um and probably
what is it about here by now to at 20
21.
and the orbit is elliptical but it's not
as elliptical as that
diagram makes it look because we're
looking
at it almost edge on
if you stretch the ellipse out
to look at it from the perpendicular
direction to the plane of the ellipse
then you would see it as the shape
that's shown around the outside
that's not really a third star they're
just in this diagram
showing you what the shape of the orbit
would look like if it wasn't for the
perspective
now when we we look at it the angle
between
the a and b stars varies as that
ellipse uh is
shown in different positions and
the maximum separation that you can see
is just 22 arc seconds
which is an easy separate for a amateur
telescope
that happened in 1976 and is going to
happen again in 2056.
as with uh all things we in the present
are just about at the closest the they
were four
arc seconds apart in 2016 and that's
beyond the capabilities
of the smallest amateur telescopes
larger ones uh will be able to separate
two things that are four arc seconds
apart if you get a clear night
with good stable seeing just
so at the moment it's quite a challenge
so
four arc seconds in 2016 and it's
opening up it's about was about five
uh now so you can see it as of 2019 4.92
so it's getting better
and easier to actually see them but
there's no use
for my telescope because uh the earth's
in the way as we said you'd have to go
uh to the southern hemisphere and of
course
you need a reasonably large telescope so
a portable one's no good
but in fact the system is a triple star
system
and element c
which we now call proxima century was
discovered
uh quite a long time later so the
original double was discovered in 1689
it wasn't until 1915 that robert innis
managed to spot that there was another
star
that shared the same proper motion
across the sky
and when he measured the parallax for it
he spotted that it was the same distance
um and reasoned that therefore it was
part of the alpha centauri system
in fact it's slightly closer to
us than its uh brethren
it's uh 4.24 light years but that's just
because
at the moment it's orbiting around the
common center of masses
and is on our side of the system and you
can see in the little animation there
that is proxima centauri moving against
the background
stars in five-year steps showing
really quite a large amount of proper
motion
from year to year easy to measure
so again this is where alpha centauri
is and alpha centauri a and b both
appear together there
proxima centuries actually clearly
separated from them
here again we've got the stars of the
southern cross
and this one here this is beta centauri
not to be confused with alpha centauri b
so if we uh look at that in with a
little bit of zoom in
alpha centauri a there's the four arc
seconds between
a and b but proxima centauri is is over
here
mixed in amongst the star clouds of the
milky way which is
why it took so long before it was
spotted it's actually
clearly you know degrees away from alpha
centauri
so it took took a while before it was
identified
now we said that this little group then
of alpha centauri a
b and proxima are the nearest stars to
the sun
here's here's the sun we talked about
the oort cloud uh
last week i think um out here
four light years and a little bit we get
to alpha centauri
the next nearest star is over here
barnard star
that has again a high proper motion the
highest of all in fact
and was measured and
the distance gained by parallax in 1916
so
round about the same time that proxima
was identified
barnard's star was discovered and uh
came out at six point something light
years 6.2 light years i think
these other guys out here much more
recent discoveries
with these exciting names this is the
wide field infrared survey
um using the wise telescope and
these are brown dwarfs out here just
beyond the six light year mark
as the next nearest objects to the sun
and those are failed stars they're
intermediate size objects between uh
a giant planet and a star a bit bigger
than jupiter
i think if jupiter would have to be 75
times more massive to become a star
and these things are probably 10 times
to 20 times the mass of jupiter
so that's that's where things are now
but we can also
plot the future and indeed back
calculate into the past
the path of some of these nearby stars
relative to the sun
so the dotted blue line here that's now
and
proxima centauri this orangey yellow
line here
is the nearest now followed by alpha
centauri
followed by barnard star and then
ignoring the
brown dwarfs we go out to the next
proper star
which is this one leyland 21
185 and then ross248
but you can see that the distance is
changing alpha and proxima
are swinging towards us and getting
closer and they will do so for some
considerable time to come
um about 25 000 years i think and then
they'll start to separate away from us
again
likewise barnard's star is approaching
us but it's not
quite going to uh take the record from
alpha centauri system it's going to get
close to the same distance but then turn
away from us again
due to its different path the the ones
that are going to be
become the nearest star to the sun in
the future are the
red dwarf star ross 248 which in this
time here so about 30 or 40 000 years
into the future
that will be the nearest star and then a
little bit later
once it's retreated another red dwarf
glieser
445 will hold the record briefly
but then it'll be back to alpha again
for quite some time
so we know that there are three stars
and that
we can see two of them as a single entry
and the third one widely separated
enough
to to be identifiable as a clear
separate star but what are the stars
actually like
well they the two main ones are very
similar to the sun
alpha centauri a officially called rigel
ken taurus which
translates as the foot of the centaur
and alpha centauri b taliman
the ostriches which was an aborigine
name for the constellation of the centur
of centuris
and so when they were looking for a name
to give to alpha centauri b
they used tollyman and these two orbit
each other in 80 years as we've seen
with an elliptical orbit
from 35 astronomical units which is
just bigger than the distance from the
sun to neptune
to a close approach of 11 astronomical
units
which is around about the orbits of
saturn so
there's quite a big gap inside
where neither of them uh would go
but they're filling really what would we
we would consider to be
the outer solar system that um alpha
centauri b
is traversing the whole of the outer
solar system
as it uh makes its repeated orbits round
and then proxima centauri alpha centauri
c is much smaller
that's a little red dwarf compared to
these two which are fairly similar to
the sun
and uh it's slightly closer it's
actually 13
000 astronomical units closer or
0.2 of a light year so alpha centauri a
is a little bit hotter and a little bit
more massive than the sun
110 the mass gives out 152
of the light and has a temperature
that's just uh
a little bit warmer the sun is five
seven two two kelvin and alpha centauri
a 5790 kelvin so
about 70 degrees hotter still gets
classified in the same
g2 class of yellow dwarfs
spins on its axis in 22 days that's a
little bit faster than the sun
which takes 26 and that's typical of
the larger the star the faster they tend
to spin it's uh to do with
mass and angular momentum a bit like a
skier
it's not a skier a skater pulling their
arms in and going into a spin
if the more mass you pull in the faster
you will end up spinning so if the
skater was holding a massive dumbbell in
each hand and went into a spin and then
pulled them in
they would spin up even more and so the
larger the mass the faster they tend to
rotate
it shows magnetic activity and we've
even been able to detect star spots on
the surface
although the activities died down since
and it's a bit like the sun went into
what was called the maunder minimum
a couple of hundred years ago where
there were no sunspots for a long period
of time
so maybe that's a characteristic of
these sun-like stars
alpha centauri b little bit smaller it
gets classified as a k
type star more orange than yellow
only 90 percent of the mass so not that
much lighter
but it makes a huge difference the uh
luminosity the amount of light is just
under half that of the sun
as opposed to 150 percent for alpha
centauri a
and the temperatures down by around
about 500 degrees you can see that there
rotates more slowly because it's smaller
36 days
so that fits that same rule more
magnetically active
which also goes with the smaller stars
they tend to be more active
and this is to do with the way that
their internals get
um convicted and it has a sunspot cycle
we have a sunspot cycle of 11 years
usually
and uh alpha centauri b has an 8.2 year
sunspot cycle and sometimes has flares
we've detected at least one
and strong x-ray emissions from it
and then we have c proxima an m-type red
dwarf
much cooler just over 3000 degrees
12 the mass of the sun and
only 120 000th of the light output
no wonder it's so faint and hard to see
rotates in 83 days so smaller and more
slowly rotating
produces more flares and that's
characteristic of the smaller stars and
again strong x-rays coming from those
flares but 12 percent of the mass of the
sun is almost as small as a proper star
can be
the the absolute lower limit for proper
nuclear fusion to occur converting
hydrogen to helium is seven and a half
percent
the mass of the sun so alpha centauri c
proxima is only just managing to be a
red dwarf star
it was much lighter it would have been
one of those brown dwarfs
a failed star
now for a long time there was a
controversy about its orbit
until 2017 it wasn't known whether
proxima was
merely passing by alpha century
or whether it was in a a bound orbit
gravitationally bound to the a b
pair but the gaia satellite that's out
there
measuring the uh 3d structure of
the milky way and pinning down the
position
and movement of a billion stars has uh
tracked
down and measured proxima's movement
sufficiently accurately
that we can now say for sure that it is
in a captured orbit
although it's a very long one it takes
just over half a million years as you
can see on the slide there
to go around and slightly elliptical
goes from 4
300 au to 13 000 au
so again our bad luck was to find it
at the point where it was moving the
most slowly because
that's what happens when you're at the
extreme outer point of your orbit
which is where it is at the moment the
apostrom point
the distance furthest away from this
parent star
that makes it uh move more slowly by
kepler's laws
so how old are these stars are they
relatives of the sun
they're nearby and sun like could they
be the sun's
sisters that were all born in the same
uh
original star cluster well it's a little
bit difficult to
estimate the ages and the figures come
out with a range from
4.85 billion years to 6.52 billion years
so that's perhaps arguably just a little
bit older
than the sun because we think the sun is
between four and a half billion
and five billion but it's not beyond the
bounds of possibility that these
ranges overlap if it turns out that uh
the alpha centauri stars are
at the younger end of things then that
4.85
might match the
value for the sun so we're still looking
into that one
so what's going to happen in the future
with them well
star a being 110 the mass
of our sun will have a
shorter life span than our sun because
it's burning faster due to the
heavier mass and even though it's got
more fuel due to the heavier mass
it burns disproportionately more quickly
i think the rate of fusion goes up
something like the fourth power of the
mass which is why
it's so much brighter just uh just
because it's ten percent
heavier it's 50 percent brighter and
that
shortens the life so the sun will live
uh
10 billion years and is 5 billion years
old
alpha centuries about 5 billion years
old but it's only going to live
6.8 billion before it runs out of fuel
so in roughly 2 billion years time
it's going to take the next step on its
life cycle and turn into a red giant
and then a planetary nebula shedding its
outer layers
and then shrink down to a small white
dwarf about half a solar mass
left in the white dwarf there
b of course being slightly lighter than
the sun
90 of the sun's mass and only 50 percent
of the output
is going to live twice as long as the
sun
20 billion years and so it also being
five billion years old means
that it's still a teenager and it's got
another three quarters of its life to go
all the way out 15 billion years but it
will undergo a very similar process
of going red giant planetary nebula
white dwarf
uh probably slightly smaller white dwarf
but that age and lifetime is nothing
proxima c is going 12 percent of the
mass of the sun and a
20 000th of the solar output that's got
an expected lifespan of
2 trillion years way longer than the age
of the universe so far
and in fact no red dwarf star however
far back in time it was born has got
anywhere near running out of fuel
yet they're only still really in nappies
and um it will eventually we
think just for my helium white dwarf
but we don't know because we've never
seen one because we will have to wait
about a trillion years uh before the
first
red dwarf stars begin to go through that
process
which is a ridiculous length of time
now with a and b being so close together
a is going to turn into a white dwarf
first due to its shorter life
but in 15 billion years time when b
also turns into a red giant in that
uh life cycle it will swell up
and as it does so it loses the
gravitational hole on its outer layers
and so material will begin to
be lost from the much expanded
red giant b and will spiral
over onto and be gravitationally pulled
down onto the surface
of the white dwarf uh formerly known as
a
and sometimes that can cause catastrophe
because
it can lead to a type 1a supernova but i
don't think it will in this case because
for that to happen the mass limit of
1.44
solar masses has to be exceeded the
chandrasekhar limit
the upper mass limit for a white dwarf
any
more than that put another teaspoonful
of mass on and they explode
violently as a type 1a supernova
but we will have here probably um a
half solar mass white dwarf and then the
entire mass of
alpha centauri b is only another nine
tenths so if you add those two together
if
they completely merged you still don't
quite have enough mess
for it to uh detonate so we'll end up
with a pair of white dwarfs
roughly half a solar mass each orbiting
each other
and then they will gradually spiral
inwards over
trillions of years um and eventually
collide
um and when they do that can lead to a
very similar uh supernova explosion like
a type 1a
so eventually that will happen but what
about planets around these stars
i hear you ask well we already know of
two
and this is brand new news really in
astronomical terms proxima centauri the
little red dwarf
has two planets it has at least two
planets i should say
it's got proxima b now we we
give stars in multiple systems
uppercase letters going uppercase
a b c and so on and we give the planets
lowercase letters
but for some reason we start at b we
never start at
a so very confusing so the first one to
be discovered was proxima
b and this is an earth-sized planet
um just a little bit larger than the
earth a little bit more massive
orbiting around proxima and only
0.05 astronomical units
and whizzing around every 11.2 days
that was discovered four years ago in
november 2016.
and proxima c the second planet
was discovered in 2019 just last year i
think it was june they discovered it
and they announced it a few months later
once they got their paper published
and that is in a 1.5 astronomical
unit orbit around which takes 5.2
years to
travel around and there's a hint
now of a third object in a
even smaller orbit than proxima b
so this if it's confirmed will be
proxima d
in a 5.1 day orbit right in close
and it's a little tiny planet if it's
there just uh
0.29 of the earth's mass so similar in
mass to mercury
and actually placed in a fairly similar
and rather toasty position
up close to the surface of the star
almost
so proxima b found in 2016
and uh that was discovered using the the
radial velocity doppler shift method
they looked for the
reading and bluing color changes
of the spectrum of the light from
the star proxima and observed
that that was wobbling backwards and
forwards as shown in this little plot
down here
and you can see that there is an 11 day
period
in that which was caused by the
gravitational tug
from proxima b and from that
we can work out that the mass of proxima
b must be at least
that minimum figure there 1.173
earth masses fairly precise but it could
be
up to 2.8 and we reason we have the
uncertainty
is we don't know if the plane of the
orbit
is nearly in our line of sight
in which case we would get the maximum
amount of wobble of the star per unit
mass of the planet
or if the orbit of the planet is tipped
uh over compared to our line of sight
then the movement to and fro of the star
towards the planet
won't be quite aligned with our line of
sight and be reduced
and so we will underestimate uh the
mass if we don't take account of that so
if it were
almost at right angles then we would be
estimating nearly three 2.8
earth masses now
with um proxima being a cool red dwarf
with a 3000 degree surface temperature
of the star
being only 0.05 a you away
is uh quite a reasonable
position to be in this slide doesn't
read quite right it says the temperature
should be around minus 39 degrees but
unfortunately the minus has
stayed on the line above there sorry
about that but um let's try to say minus
39 degrees
so warm compared to
the sometimes really freezing
temperatures that we see
enough to freeze nitrogen and so on on
some of the moons of
saturn for example but not
warm enough for liquid water unless it's
got a thick atmosphere
and that's very interesting because if
it had a thick atmosphere
uh it would warm it up by their
greenhouse effect
and could bring it to a habitable
temperature
would have to have quite a substantial
atmosphere
the earth's atmosphere warms the earth
from -15 that it would otherwise be
to about 20 degrees centigrade so a 35
degree
uplift is what we're getting at the
moment
and we're worried about it going any
higher
so here we're looking for about a 50
degree
uplift in the temperature maybe a 40
degree uplift in the temperature so you
need a bit of a thicker atmosphere
but the planet has a greater mass and
if perhaps it was a one and a half to
two so
earth masses it would probably be able
to hold on
to a very decent sized atmosphere
now the unfortunate thing from a
habitable point of view as well
is that being close to the star
has a disadvantage that you also receive
a lot of
very strong radiation in the form of the
stellar wind
and also a lot of x-rays from any
flares that occur on the star and
unprotected that would be very bad but
again if it's
massive enough to have a very thick
atmosphere then that could provide
enough protection
for the surface to be a habitable zone
and so that's a very very interesting
situation
just to give you a sense of the scale
here's the sun
and proxima centauri size for size the
sun is way
larger and here is proxima b and the
earth
size for size and again we've got
jupiter and saturn so you can see that
actually
proxima is only marginally larger in
diameter
than a giant planet just over that
threshold
that makes it a proper star
now another problem that has been
discussed as regards
whether proxima b might be a candidate
for life
is that these red dwarf stars misbehave
for a couple of hundred million years
after they're formed
they're very very turbulent and active
during that first
period of their existence and that tends
to increase the heat output
which would move the habitable zone
further away
leaving proxima b a bit too warm and a
bit too toasty for comfort
and so that might have then stripped
away quite a lot of atmosphere
and then as the star cools down to where
it is today
the habitable zone moves inwards so the
question is
did any water and atmosphere survive on
proxima b
but i think you've got to remember that
um actually
the earth wasn't habitable for the first
500 million years or so
of its existence um it was probably a
molten ball of lava
with the leftover heat of its formation
and so proxima b
would probably be that as well and as
with the earth
water might well have been delivered
later after the surface had cooled down
and after the star had settled down
and that might well have
been able to solve the problem of
habitability
the stellar wind might blow the magnet
the atmosphere away is another problem
and a lot therefore depends on whether
it has a magnetic field
and that depends on whether it spins in
enough to create a magnetic field
if it does if it's spinning reasonably
fast then
it should be protected in the same way
that we are
but a large enough planets if it was
maybe two and a half's
uh earth masses would probably have a
super thick atmosphere
and that in itself might be enough to
render it habitable
so there's a lot we still need to
understand
about this before we can really uh have
any confidence in our
predictions of livability
what about proxima c then this is an
artist's impression of
proxima proxima b and the larger proxima
c
so discovered just in 2020 and announced
and it is a larger planet seven earth
masses
that's uh much larger than the earth
obviously
and smaller than the outer giants
uranus and neptune i think neptune is
about 16
earth masses so it's an
intermediate-sized planet
a super-earth or a mini neptune
depending on your point of view
and depending on what it's made of
it takes 5.2 years to go around in its
orbit
and at that distance from the star
it's uh chile minus 234 degrees
centigrade so we're looking more at a
mini neptune perhaps
in terms of temperature
now amazingly we have directly imaged
proxima c we have a direct telescope
image of it
not managed to do that with proxima b
it's
so close to the star and very small that
that's a real challenge
but here is the discovery image if you
like
the proxima itself is over there these
two blobs are
distant background stars there's a
certain amount of
digital noise but this thing here this
is moving
and is the the planet proxima c
now when they did that there's a little
bit of a surprise because
for a seven earth mass planet like
neptune perhaps
at that distance from a dim star you can
work out how bright
you'd expect it to be but the brightness
here was
much too great and
the reason that they think it's
reflecting more light
is because it's got a very large system
of rings
that make saturn's rings look pathetic
and so even though the mass is
relatively
uh small compared to something like
saturn
it's got this very large and reflective
spread out system of rings
so again fascinating to uh
to learn more about our nearest neighbor
solar system
and i say there is a potential third
planet there that we really don't know
very much about
now just thinking about the the
possibility then
of further planets in the system what
about planets that orbit around the a
and the b stars is that possible and
being as their sun-like stars it seems
like a very attractive idea
that they would have formed with a
similar set of planets
all other things being equal to those
that we have
but being a binary pair that does rather
mess things up it restricts the
possibilities for the orbits
because alpha centauri b is
sweeping in and out across that outer
solar system range
now we've had a good look and found no
gas
giants and no other brown dwarf
failed star members of the system so
we're pretty sure there are no
large objects there
instruments not yet perhaps sensitive
enough to detect small
earth-like planets there was an
announcement in 2012
of an earth-like planet being discovered
orbiting around alpha centauri b
which therefore goes with the name alpha
centauri bb
one one capital b and one lowercase b
but it's been unfortunately debunked in
new analysis carried out in oxford
showed that
the numerical methods that they were
using to
analyze the data was actually generating
artifacts that looked like this planet
so
sorry that was another of the planets
that never were
but in 2013 a possible transit
was observed where the planet passes in
front of the star
and blocks the light and
if that's confirmed
then it's a planet slightly smaller than
the earth
92 so about the size of venus
and in a 12-day orbit around
alpha centauri b that's going to be
pretty hot because
alpha centauri b is half the power
output of the sun
and being in an orbit only 12 days
you'll be much closer in than mercury
is to the sun
so the interesting thing is you can do
various simulations and calculations to
try to figure out where you could have
stable orbits and you can have stable
orbits
well away from both stars much as
proxima
centauri orbits the two of them and
really observes them
gravitationally to be a single entity um
it thinks there's a a two solar mass
star that it's orbiting they're
so close together from its point of view
so there are orbits well outside
there are also orbits in close to alpha
centauri a
anywhere um in this
sort of range is possible
and the same is true for alpha centauri
b
you can have stable orbits in there
and these are the habitable zones from
0.5 to 1.4 au
around alpha centauri b
closer in than our habitable zone and
again quite a wide range they've given
there
allowing for a very large planet with a
thick atmosphere
at the outer edge or a smaller planet
with a thin atmosphere
at the inner edge of the habitable zone
and the earth-like habitable zone is the
dotted line
here it is for alpha centauri a so
out out here out of just over one um
1.2 at a u i think it is
and again they've given a rather
generous width to the habitable zones
but the stable orbits again you can do
that calculation and show that with them
at closest approach of 11 a.u
you would be all right as long as you're
within uh
about 2 a.u of alpha century b
and a little bit further for alpha
centauri a
so the habitable zones are places you
could orbit
without your orbit being badly affected
by the other companion so that's quite
interesting
but you couldn't really have any giant
planet companions
orbiting further out because they would
be disrupted by
close approaches to the other star
whichever
you're talking about
so the question is do they well what we
have
observed is that both stars show
disks of dust and this is observed in
the infrared
we see excess infrared emissions
around both the a and the b
stars and this is
a bit like we have the uh dust
that causes the zodiacal light in our
solar system it's the leftover
building blocks of uh planets
in our solar system but alpha centauri a
and b
have a hundred times as much or ten to a
hundred times as much
mass in these dust discs um
that could be because they weren't able
to form any
planets further out and the uh
any giant planets would have been either
collided with the other star or kicked
out
or um thrown further in
into the inner part of their solar
systems so it could be that
uh there are quite
uh thick sort of clouds of dust maybe
this is even an asteroid belt
type structure we don't know it's around
about 2.8
astronomical units for a and 2 a u
for b so it's just on the outer edge
of the habitable zones and just on the
outer edge of the
stable orbit zones so any
any actual stable orbits for planets
would be further in
there's even a dust disc around proxima
again showing that same sort of uh
structure that we have in the solar
system here
only at this time it's outside the
orbits of the known planets
and it's more like a kuiper belt the uh
leftovers that where pluto orbits out
beyond neptune
in our solar system of course are called
the kuiper belt
of course our system is proportionately
larger with a more massive star and so
that's out at
35 astronomical units or so in proxima's
case the whole thing's scaled down due
to its
lesser gravity and smaller mass and
so it's the two to four astronomical
uh unit region here where this uh dust
disk
exists but it's indicative that there
might be
a full-on solar system in miniature with
all the features
that we have in ours
but just another way of looking at this
is to
look at the sun and alpha centauri
system
as whether we should consider them
to be interacting with each other and we
can
look at the sphere of influence of
gravity of the sun
anything within this zone here around
the sun
out to just below one light year it is
captured by the sun anything inside this
larger grey
sphere here is captured by the alpha
centauri system including proxima
and the reason is you can do the math
there's a there's a little formula for
this
and if you plug in one solar mass and
you do the numbers
you get 0.76 of a light year for the sun
but the alpha centauri system is just
over two
solar masses so you plug the numbers in
and you get a number about double one
and a half
1.6 uh light years for the
gravitational dominance zone around
these things so they these are the
regions in which
uh the outer planets might orbit right
around the whole lot
anything right out towards the edge is
only going to be
fairly loosely attached and run the risk
of being torn away
as the distance between the stars
changes though you've got to bear that
in mind and
they are getting closer as we saw
so if you were standing stargazing
on proxima centauri b
that earth-like planet well you wonder
what the sky would look like
and the answer is it would look almost
exactly the same as it does from earth
because you've only moved uh four light
years away
and so the distance and uh
angles and the parallax of most of the
other stars would hardly have changed
obviously there'd be a bright star
missing from the constellation of
centuris
because uh alpha centauri will be
missing
from centuris and actually will seem to
move across the sky tremendously fast
and you'll even be able to see the two
separate stars
of that um as small
uh discs in the uh distance
that are orbiting around each other so
it might be quite a spectacular
sight um to see that and of course
they'd be very very bright indeed at
that distance
so it might be that there is no real
uh darkness on proxima b unless
but all three of the stars happen to be
um
on the other side of the planet from you
which could make the day and night cycle
quite complicated
but the sun would be a very bright star
over here in the constellation of
cassiopeia
on the opposite side of the sky to where
we see alpha centauri for obvious
reasons it would be
180 degrees displaced but down here in
orion
orion would look the same except sirius
also being a fairly nearby star it's
only eight light years from the
sun and actually therefore changes its
position as viewed from
proxima b to be almost in the same
direction as betelgeuse so a
pair of really bright stars close
together
so what if we decided to go there for a
holiday
how long would it take 24.2 light years
can't be too difficult
well a light year light travels 300 000
kilometers
per second for one year you can work out
that a year
is all of this 31 million seconds
roughly
and so you can work out that a light
year is
or of this number which i'm going to
call 10 trillion kilometers
because it's nearly that
and so i have to thank brian lister for
this next idea
if you set off when stoner henge was
being built
using your stone age rocket
how far do you think you would have got
traveling at the fastest speed that a
rocket can go
well you'd have had um eight thousand
six hundred years to do it
and if you work out how far you've got
traveling
at 1200 kilometers per hour which is uh
quite a reasonably fast
speed um i think this is actually for a
fighter jet this sort of speed here
rather than a rocket then
it turns out you'd have made it 1 100th
of a light year
so i'm afraid you uh basically have got
nowhere
by comparison to the distance you've uh
went on
one 400th of the distance in 8 600
years traveling at twice the speed of
sound i think that is
and so just to wrap up we should talk a
little bit about
uh these gentlemen what we have here
um yuri miller russian billionaire who
put a hundred million dollars on the
table to found the breakthrough
initiative
backed by the late stephen hawking and
sadly also
freedom and dyson here both now
sadly passed away and to try and answer
the the big question are we alone
and what they proposed was a mission to
alpha centauri
and the nearest stars and they want to
launch a
a rocket that will travel um or a
spacecraft that will travel at 20
percent the speed of light
that's 140 million miles an hour
but the only way you can do that is to
use a rocket to launch your spacecraft
off the earth
and then deploy a star sail
a light sail like this and fire a laser
beam
at it from the earth and the
pressure of the laser light bouncing off
the reflective
light sail will accelerate the
spacecraft continuously
and the advantage of this is you don't
have to take your fuel with you
you can leave the fuel to power the
laser on the ground
i think 99 of the weight
of a rocket going to orbit is fuel and
99.9
of a rocket going to the moon has to be
fueled
so it's hopelessly inefficient whereas
here we can leave all that fuel on the
ground
so the idea will be a little spacecraft
like this with a light sail
some some uh photovoltaic
panels to power the spacecraft again
powered by the laser
and a little transmitter which will try
to
uh use amplification from the big light
sail
to give it a nice big dish to transmit
the signals back to earth and
a huge array with a gigawatt
of laser pointing up into the sky
uh continuously firing to power this
thing
during the acceleration phase which will
last for many months
to get it up to speed
so i think with a four meter solar sail
they reckon that you can
do this accelerator 20 speed of light
and therefore make it to proxima in 20
years
which is a plausible length of time for
a space mission
they often take 10 20 30 years to
reach their destinations so
the this would be the spacecraft
the breakthrough star chip it's a little
computer
with sensors and cameras using mobile
phone technology
um and storage and uh gets the power
from the
uh as i say from the laser using
photovoltaic cells
so uh very light weight it has to be
we're going to try and
use not very much power to accelerate it
so it needs to be as light as possible
and it really would be that size plus
the four meter solar sail
and the idea would be to launch a
thousand of these in one go
in a in a single spacecraft launch
and then fly this swarm out
all towards alpha centauri on in the
hope
that some of them get through without
colliding with anything on the way
because a collision even with a small
speck of uh
space dust when you're traveling at 20
percent speed of light
is going to destroy your spacecraft
instantaneously
the other part of the breakthrough
project that is running already
is breakthrough listen and they're using
the park's dish
made famous because it brought the tv
signals from apollo 11
back and relayed them to nasa uh as
in the the film the dish which if you
haven't seen is a great film
um and this has been listening to a
million stars
across a very very wide range of
frequencies
a much better uh project in terms of
listening to
the universe than anything else and the
hot news
is that in december 2020 they announced
a detection from april and may in 2019
of what's called blc1 the breakthrough
list of signal number one
and the the blc1 radio signal is not
coming from the earth they know that
because
they can point the park's dish at it and
hear it
and then move it slightly off axis and
the signal disappears
only reappearing if you nod the
telescope back
to the original source so it's not
locally generated radio interference
they do have previous at the parks dish
for announcing signals that turned out
to be their own microwave oven
cooking the jacket potatoes so they are
very careful about that these days
i kid you not
it's a very strange and unnatural
looking signal it's at 982.00
megahertz very narrow band
very narrow range of frequencies most
natural freq radio sources are quite
wide
band broadened out because the
object that's giving out the radiation
usually
has a range of temperatures associated
with it and that range of temperatures
gives a
a range of doppler shifts to this signal
but artificial signals are made to
concentrate the energy
right tight in one band so they're as
easy as possible to receive
and distinguish from all the background
noise
it's got a rising pitch that frequency
is
changing over time and that suggests
that what it
what the object was was accelerating
towards us
whatever it was giving it a a positive
blue shift a doppler shift to higher
pitch
now they've studied the signal and it
can't find
anything other than the carrier wave
there's no modulation
of any form that we can find no message
hiding inside it
so if it's artificial then
it's a very strange artificial signal um
it's the form you might have for a
beacon or a
dial tone for the galactic internet
for you to connect but it's got no data
on it
and it only lasted three hours and then
it stopped and we haven't seen it since
so that's uh very very intriguing indeed
and
is actually by far the best candidate
for a technological signal
and as i say just discovered last year
so
quite intriguing but sadly it's gone
away
under my hearing aid yeah 982 megahertz
is right in the mobile phone band
um for some countries uh not australia
but um where the park's dish is so
we're just gonna hope they didn't have
some japanese visitors
but we'll see maybe they
came for a visit lasting three hours
that would be about right for a guided
tour wouldn't it
who knows and finally i've just got one
slide about
beta centauri the other star that we
mentioned right in the
constellation there not to be confused
with alpha centauri b
so the main claim to fame of beta
centauri is it's not alpha centauri b
but it's quite a wacky system in its own
right it's a triple star system
it's got three big hot massive
blue bluey white b type stars
um 12 11 and 4 solar masses and they're
390 light years away so they're
not actually nearby they're bright
because they're
powerful rather than because they're
close
so i just thought i'd give that a
mention because it never gets talked
about poor old beta century
alpha gets all the all the fuss but
there it is
so thank you very much for listening i
hope you've enjoyed that
and i'll call that to a whole